In this video, we're going to
look at how we can perform
calculations with dates and
some of the functions
that can help us.
The first thing
Zara needs to do is
work out when the invoice
are actually due.
Now for argument's sake,
let's say they were due six
days after the invoice date.
All she'd need to do is
click in E5 type "=",
click on the invoice
date and add six.
Because dates are
really just numbers,
you can work with
them like numbers,
and there's our due date.
Let's double-click
to copy that down,
and you can do subtractions with
dates in exactly the same way.
So I'm going to click into M5,
I am going to work out how much
our invoice is overdue by.
So I'm going to type "=",
going to take our Payment
Date and subtract
our Due Date, and there you go.
There's a function we can use
to subtract days as well.
It's called the DAYS function.
If I click into M5 and
type "=D-A-Y",
and make sure I choose DAYS,
plural, I specify
my end date first.
So that's going to
be my payment date
and then my due date.
You can see I get
exactly the same answer
and I'll double-click
to copy that down.
Now, coming back to our due date,
let's just check
something and that is
what day those payments
are falling on.
So I'm going to click on F and
press "Control, Shift, Plus"
to insert another column.
You can also use
your Insert, too,
and just a reminder,
we can use our TEXT function.
I'm going to click "Due Date".
Remember we need to type quotes,
"DDD" close your quotes,
and enter to get the day of
the week and you'll
see we have a problem.
A lot of these due
dates are falling
on Saturdays and Sundays,
which in Australia
are non-working days.
Very often for these
types of calculations,
you need to take working
days into account,
and there's a function
that can help us.
It's called the WORKDAY function.
Let's now change our
example to say that
the due date is actually
six working days after
the invoice date.
So clicking back into E5,
I'm going to type "=
W-O-R-K" and choose WORKDAY.
My start date is still
my invoice date,
but this time I want to
add six working days,
so it's actually going to skip
the weekends when I press Enter.
You see that has
worked beautifully.
No Saturdays or Sundays showing.
Now, obviously for
different countries
and different organizations,
Saturday and Sunday are not
always the non-working days.
So Excel offers us
another function
similar to the WORKDAY,
but called Workday International.
This will allow you
to actually specify
what your work week
actually looks like.
So typing "Workday
International",
I'm going to click my
invoice date and a comma,
my days still six but next,
for argument's sake,
let's say we don't
work on Sundays or Tuesdays.
You see options down here
that may fit your business,
but if it doesn't,
there's another option.
You can actually give it a code,
and the code looks like this.
Open your double
quotes and then you
need to type seven
zeroes or ones;
one representing
a non-working day
and zero representing a workday.
Excel starts with Monday.
So in our example,
Monday is a working day,
so we put zero,
Tuesday non-working
day so one, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday,
Saturday zeroes,
and one for Sunday.
Close your double
quotes and enter.
You'll see our due
date has moved to one
after the Tuesday because
Tuesday is a non-working day,
so I'll just copy that down.
Wait, there's still one problem.
I happen to know
that in Australia,
the 10th of April
is Easter Friday,
and that's actually
a public holiday.
The great news is
that the WORKDAY and
the WORKDAY International
functions will
allow us to take
holidays into account.
I'm just going to come to E6 for
a moment and change
just this one.
When I double-click,
you'll see at
the end it allows me
to specify holidays,
but what I can do is
just type the date
as I normally would.
Because remember, dates
are actually numbers.
So one way of solving
this problem is to
use a DATE function.
So I'm going to put in date,
the year is 2020,
the month is April and Easter
Friday falls on the 10th.
Close my brackets and
that has taken the
holiday into account.
The problem is Saturday, Sunday,
and Easter Monday
are also holidays.
To have to start typing them
all in is really
going to be a pain.
So a better way of dealing with
holidays is to actually have them
listed somewhere else in
your workbook and then
just select them,
and that's what
we're going to do.
So we're going to come to E5,
double-click and right at
the end of my double quotes,
but before my brackets,
I'm going to type a comma,
and I've got the holidays in
the New South Wales
holiday sheet.
I'm just going to
select all those dates.
So I can copy the formula down
and then just press Enter.
It hasn't affected
this first date,
but when I double-click
to copy down,
you see this is actually being
pushed out to the
next working day.
That's not a holiday,
which is Wednesday.
Really clever.
Now on the other
side of the coin,
if we need to subtract
working days,
we have our NETWORKDAYS function.
So let's come back to our Overdue
By and let's work out how
many days it's overdue by.
I'm going to type
"=N-E-T". You'll see again
there's a NETWOWRKDAYS or a
NETWORKDAYS International.
They work pretty much
like the workdays.
We'll just use NETWORKDAYS
for simplicity.
Our start date now,
and this time notice we're
putting a start date first,
that's going to be our due date,
our end date is going
to be our payment date,
and our holidays begin
to specify that again.
You can see it has adjusted
to only show us how
many working days,
not including holidays
it is overdue by.
So quite a few functions
we've looked at here.
The DAYS function for
subtracting two dates,
then WORKDAYS and Workday
International for
adding a certain number of
workdays and NETWORKDAYS,
and NETWORKDAYS International for
subtracting a certain
number of days.
This business case only really
required us to work with days.
But if you need to
work with years,
for example, there's
a fantastic function
called YEARFRAC.
We've included this
in the toolbox,
which I'd encourage
you to check out.